# Overview 
    - In my notebook, the point of my analyses was to get familiar with importing datasets into my notebook, learning how to create a dataframe off of that imported data, and to create a visualization of the data by using the imported library tools. I used the incarceration-race dataset that was found in the data_stories repository. Although I did not find anything meaningful because there were no titles to the data nor on the dataframe, I believe that I learned a lot just from simply doing this assignment. I think if I were to redo this assignment with a different dataset, I would find something within that data. 
## Dataset
    - The dataset I used was titled incarceration-race and this could be found in the data_stories folder located on the class repository. The dataset was complied, I believe, in a .xpt file which means I could not see it on github nor could I download it to my laptop to view. Therefore, I was left with teh jupyter notebook of the data and that is what I used to help me download the data as well. I moved both files into my assignments 2 folder. 
### Running the Code
    - To run the notebook, I would first open a terminal to make sure you have an updated repository by typing in git pull upstream master then git push. Now you have an updated version. Then, you would open the notebook and start from the top and push the RUN button on top to run the first lines of code then continue downward to make sure the code is all running. You should see all the data frames and the data plots. 
#### Contributing 
    - I believe that someone could go through this data and add names to the dataframes to make it easier to read. Also, there are so many columns and I know there is an easier way to get rid of multiple columns without painstakingly typing in all the column names so I think someone should do that. Furthermore, I don't know why my hyperplot looks different from the main jupyter's notebook of this data set - I am guessing because it is different kernels? But I tried to add extensions or functions to the hyptertools plot for my data but it kept giving me errors and I ended up just making a simple plot because I thought that was good. However, I cannot see the variables or do not know what they mean so I just chose the first 2-3 columns to be the x and y labels of my plot. I consulted Athina to help me with this assignment - she just looked over all that I did. And I consulted you. 
 